<!--
For separate aligned_object_storage proposal: aligned_object_storage::object()
should not be `constexpr` because it can never be called in a `constexpr`
context.

`aligned_object_storage` can be implemented as a `union`.
-->

P1083R6 \
Pablo Halpern <<phalpern@halpernwightsoftware.com>> \
<!-- $TimeStamp$ -->2022-07-08 20:47 EDT<!-- $ --> \
Target audience: LEWG/LWG

# Move `resource_adaptor` from Library TS to the C++ WP

Abstract
========

The `pmr::resource_adaptor` class template in the Library Fundamentals TS
wraps an object whose type that meets the allocator requirements and gives it a
`pmr::memory_resource` interface.
When the polymorphic allocator infrastructure was moved from the Library
Fundamentals TS to the C++17 working draft, `pmr::resource_adaptor` was left
behind. The decision not to move `pmr::resource_adaptor` was deliberately
conservative, but the absence of `resource_adaptor` in the standard is a
hole that must be plugged for a smooth transition to the ubiquitous use of
`polymorphic_allocator`, as proposed in [P0339](http://wg21.link/p0339) and
[P0987](http://wg21.link/p0987).  This paper proposes that
`pmr::resource_adaptor` be moved from the LFTS and added to the C++26 working
draft.

Status
======

On Oct 5, 2021, a subgroup of LWG reviewed P1083R3 and found an issue in the
way the max alignment supported by `pmr::resource_adaptor` was specified in the
paper. There was general consensus that a `MaxAlign` template parameter
would be preferable, but the change was considered to be of a design nature and
therefore requires LEWG review.  The R4 revision of this paper contains
the changes from LEWG review and the R5 revision contains fixes identified in
the LWG reflector discussion that followed.

On March 15, 2022 LEWG reviewed P1083R5 in a telcon.  Because of scheduling and
technical concerns, it was decided that the paper was not ready for C++23 but
that the paper should be revised and brought back to LEWG with the intent of
forwarding for C++26. The R6 revision contains the fixes required by LEWG.

Change History
==============

Changes from R5 to R6 (from LEGW telcon)
----------------------------------------

* Defined `max_align_v` as `inline constexpr`.
* Removed nested `type` from `aligned_raw_storage`. Made it clear that
  `aligned_raw_storage` is not a drop-in replacement for `aligned_storage`.
* Removed `aligned_object_storage`, which was not needed for this proposal,
  from the formal wording. This facility might come back in a separate paper.
* Changed ship vehicle to C++26.

Changes from R4 to R5 (from LWG reflector discussion)
-----------------------------------------------------

* Mandate that `T` for `aligned_object_storage<T>` must be an object type.
* Clarify that `T` for `aligned_object_storage<T>` may be cv-qualified.
* Change LFTS reference from v2 to v3.

Changes from R3 to R4 (from LWG telcon)
----------------------------------------------

* Added _[Design changes](#design-changes-for-lewg-review)_ section that
  describes changes after LWG review.
* Added `MaxType` as a second template parameter to `pmr::resource_adaptor`.
* Added the `max_align_v` constant, `aligned_type` metafunction,
  `aligned_raw_storage` class template, and `aligned_object_storage` class
  template.
* Made a few editorial changes to comply with LWG style.

Changes from R2 to R3 (in Kona and pre-Cologne)
-----------------------------------------------

* Changed __`resource-adaptor-imp`__ to kabob case.
* Removed special member functions (copy/move ctors, etc.) and let them be
  auto-generated.
* Added a requirement that the `Allocator` template parameter must support
  rebinding to any non-class, non-over-aligned type. This allows the
  implementation of `do_allocate` to dispatch to a suitably rebound copy of
  the allocator as needed to support any native alignment argument.

Changes from R1 to R2 (in San Diego)
------------------------------------

* Paper was forwarded from LEWG to LWG on Tuesday, 2018-10-06
* Copied the formal wording from the LFTS directly into this paper
* Minor wording changes as per initial LWG review
* Rebased to the October 2018 draft of the C++ WP

Changes from R0 to R1 (pre-San Diego)
-------------------------------------

* Added a note for LWG to consider clarifying the alignment requirements for
  `resource_adaptor<A>::do_allocate()`.
* Changed rebind type from `char` to `byte`.
* Rebased to July 2018 draft of the C++ WP.

Motivation
==========

It is expected that more and more classes, especially those that would not
otherwise be templates, will use `pmr::polymorphic_allocator<byte>` to allocate
memory rather than specifying an allocator as a template parameter. In order to
pass an allocator to one of these classes, the allocator must either already be
a polymorphic allocator, or must be adapted from a non-polymorphic allocator.
The process of adaptation is facilitated by `pmr::resource_adaptor`, which is a
simple class template, has been in the LFTS for a long time, and has been fully
implemented. It is therefore a low-risk, high-benefit component to add to the
C++ WP.

Design changes (for LEWG review)
================================

The following design changes were made as a consequence of discussions in LWG
on 5 October 2021.  LWG felt that the scope of these changes warranted review
by LEWG.

**`MaxAlign` template argument**:
A `pmr::resource_adaptor` instance wraps an object having a type that meets the
Allocator requirements. Its `do_allocate` virtual member function supplies
aligned memory by invoking the `allocate` member function on the wrapped
allocator. The only way to supply alignment information to the wrapped
allocator is to rebind it for a `value_type` having the desired alignment but,
because the alignment is specified to `pmr::resource_adaptor::allocate` at run
time, the implementation must rebind its allocator for every possible alignment
and dynamically choose the correct one. In order to keep the number of such
rebound instantiations manageable and reduce the requirements on the allocator
type, an upper limit (default `alignof(max_align_t)`) can be specified when
instantiating `pmr::resource_adaptor`. This recent change was made after
discussion with members of LWG, and with their encouragement.

**(Optional) `constexpr` value `max_align_v`**:
The standard has a type, `std::max_align_t`, whose alignment is at least as
great as that of every scalar type. I found that I was continually referring to
the *value*, `alignof(std::max_align_t)`. In fact, *every single use* of
`max_align_t` in the standard is as the operand of `alignof`. As a drive-by
fix, therefore, this proposal introduces the constant `max_align_v` as a more
straightforward spelling of `alignof(max_align_t)`.  Note that the introduction
of this constant is completely severable from the proposal if it is deemed
undesirable. The name is also subject to bikeshedding (e.g., by removing the
`_v`).

**Alias template `std::aligned_type`**:
This alias is effectively a metafunction that resolves to a scalar type if
possible, otherwise to a specialization of `aligned_raw_storage`. Its use in
this specification allows `pmr::resource_adaptor` to work with minimalist
allocators, including those that can be rebound only for scalar types.  For
over-aligned values, it uses `aligned_raw_storage`, below. Both
`aligned_raw_storage` and `aligned_type` are declared in header `<memory>`, but
LEWG could consider putting them somewhere else (e.g., in `<utility>`).

**Class template `std::aligned_raw_storage`**:
When instantiated with an alignment greater than `max_align_v`,
`std::aligned_type` could be defined vaguely in terms of an unspecified
over-aligned type, but LWG wanted to be more precise so as to better describe
the allowable set of allocators usable with `resource_adaptor`. The obvious
choice of the over-aligned type would have been `std::aligned_storage`, but
that template has been deprecated as a result of numerous flaws described in
[P1413](wg21.link/P1413).  The class template `std::aligned_raw_storage` is
intended to replace `std::aligned_storage` and correct the problems associated
with it; specifically, it is not a metafunction, but a `struct` template, and
it provides direct access to its data buffer, which can be validly cast to a
pointer to any type having the specified alignment (or less). The relationship
between size and alignment is specifically described in the wording, so
programmers can rely on it. Note that `aligned_raw_storage` is not a drop-in
replacement for the deprecated `aligned_storage` metafunction because the
arguments are reversed and it does not provide a `type` member typedef.

**(Not proposed) Class template `std::aligned_object_storage`**:
The alignment parameter for `aligned_raw_storage`, described above, is
specified as a number rather than as a type -- as needed for low-level types
like `pmr::resource_adaptor` -- and the storage must be cast to the desired
type before it's used. This primitive type practically screams for the
introduction of an aligned storage type parameterized on the type of object you
wish to store in it.  Although not needed for this proposal, prior revisions of
this proposal included `aligned_object_storage` for this purpose. However,
because of technical concerns regarding the design of `aligned_object_storage`,
it was decided that it would be best to split it out into its own paper so
that it could be refined (or rejected) separately, without affecting this
proposal.


Impact on the standard
======================

`pmr::resource_adaptor` is a pure library extension requiring no changes to the
core language nor to any existing classes in the standard library. A couple of
general-purpose templates (`aligned_type` and `aligned_raw_storage`) are also
added as pure library extensions.

Implementation Experience
=========================

A full implementation of the current proposal can be found in GitHub at
https://github.com/phalpern/WG21-halpern/tree/P1083/P1083-resource_adaptor.

The version described in the Library Fundamentals TS has been implemented by
multiple vendors in the `std::experimental::pmr` namespace.


Formal Wording
==============

_This proposal is based on the Library Fundamentals TS v3,
[N4873](http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2020/n4873.html) and
the October 2021 draft of the C++ WP,
[N4901](http://www.open-std.org/JTC1/SC22/WG21/docs/papers/2021/n4901.pdf)._

_In section 17.2.1 [cstddef.syn] of the C++WP, add the following definition
sometime after the declaration of `max_align_t` in header `<cstddef>`:_

```cpp
inline constexpr size_t max_align_v = alignof(max_align_t);
```

_In section 20.10.2 [memory.syn], add the following declarations to `<memory>`
(probably near the top):_

```cpp
template <size_t Align, size_t Sz = Align> struct aligned_raw_storage;
template <size_t Align> using aligned_type = see below;
```

_Prior to section 20.10.3, add the description of these new templates:_

**20.10.? Aligned storage [aligned.storage]**

**20.10.?.1 Aligned raw storage [aligned.raw.storage]**

```cpp
namespace std {
  template <size_t Align, size_t Sz = Align>
  struct aligned_raw_storage
  {
    static constexpr size_t alignment = Align;
    static constexpr size_t size      = (Sz + Align - 1) & ~(Align - 1);

    constexpr       void* data()       noexcept { return buffer; }
    constexpr const void* data() const noexcept { return buffer; }

    alignas(alignment) byte buffer[size];
  };
}
```

> _Mandates_: `Align` is a power of 2, `Sz > 0`

An instantiation of template `aligned_raw_storage` is a standard-layout trivial
type that provides storage having the specified alignment and size, where the
size is rounded up to the nearest multiple of the alignment.

**20.10.?.3 Aligned type [aligned.type]**

`template <size_t Align> using aligned_type =` _see below_;

> _Mandates_: `Align` is a power of 2.

If there exists a scalar type, `T`, such that `alignof(T) == Align` and
`sizeof(T) == Align`, then `aligned_type<Align>` is an alias for `T`;
otherwise, it is an alias for `aligned_raw_storage<Align, Align>`. If more than
one scalar meets the requirements for `T`, the one chosen is implementation
defined, but consistent for all instantiations of `aligned_type` with that
alignment.

_In section 20.12.1 [mem.res.syn], add the following declaration
immediately after the declaration of
`operator!=(const polymorphic_allocator...)`:_

```cpp
// 20.12.? resource adaptorfor a given alignment.
// The name resource-adaptor-imp is for exposition only.
template <class Allocator, size_t MaxAlign> class resource-adaptor-imp;

template <class Allocator, size_t MaxAlign = max_align_v>
  using resource_adaptor = resource-adaptor-imp<
    typename allocator_traits<Allocator>::template rebind_alloc<byte>,
    MaxAlign>;
```

_Insert before section 20.12.5 [mem.res.pool] of the C++ WP, the following
section, taken with modifications from section 5.5 of the LFTS v3:_

**20.12.? Alias template resource_adaptor [memory.resource.adaptor]**

**20.12.?.1 `resource_adaptor` [memory.resource.adaptor.overview]**

An instance of `resource_adaptor<Allocator, MaxAlign>` is an adaptor that wraps
a `memory_resource` interface around `Allocator`.
[_Note_: The type of `resource_adaptor<X, N>` is independent of `X::value_type`. -- _end note_]
In addition to the _Cpp17Allocator_ requirements (§15.5.3.5), the `Allocator`
parameter to `resource_adaptor` shall meet the following additional mandates:

 - `typename allocator_traits<Allocator>::pointer` shall denote the type
   `allocator_traits<Allocator>::value_type*`.

 - `typename allocator_traits<Allocator>::const_pointer` shall denote the type
    to `allocator_traits<Allocator>::value_type const*`.

 - `typename allocator_traits<Allocator>::void_pointer` shall denote the type
   `void*`.

 - `typename allocator_traits<Allocator>::const_void_pointer` shall denote the
    type `void const*`.

 - Calls to `allocator_traits<Allocator>::template`
   `rebind_traits<aligned_type<N>>::allocate` and
   `allocator_traits<Allocator>::template`
   `rebind_traits<aligned_type<N>>::deallocate` shall be well-formed for all
   `N`, such that `N` is a power of 2 less than or equal to `MaxAlign`, no
   diagnostic required.

```cpp
// The name "resource-adaptor-imp" is for exposition only.
template <class Allocator, size_t MaxAlign>
class resource-adaptor-imp : public memory_resource {
  Allocator m_alloc; // exposition only

public:
  using adapted_allocator_type = Allocator;

  resource-adaptor-imp() = default;
  resource-adaptor-imp(const resource-adaptor-imp&) noexcept = default;
  resource-adaptor-imp(resource-adaptor-imp&&) noexcept = default;

  explicit resource-adaptor-imp(const Allocator& a2) noexcept;
  explicit resource-adaptor-imp(Allocator&& a2) noexcept;

  resource-adaptor-imp& operator=(const resource-adaptor-imp&) = default;

  adapted_allocator_type get_adapted_allocator() const { return m_alloc; }

protected:
  void* do_allocate(size_t bytes, size_t alignment) override;
  void do_deallocate(void* p, size_t bytes, size_t alignment) override;
  bool do_is_equal(const memory_resource& other) const noexcept override;
};
```

**20.12.?.2 `resource-adaptor-imp` constructors [memory.resource.adaptor.ctor]**

```cpp
explicit resource-adaptor-imp(const Allocator& a2) noexcept;
```

> _Effects_: Initializes `m_alloc` with `a2`.

```cpp
explicit resource-adaptor-imp(Allocator&& a2) noexcept;
```

> _Effects_: Initializes `m_alloc` with `std::move(a2)`.

**20.12.?.3 `resource-adaptor-imp` member functions [memory.resource.adaptor.mem]**

```cpp
void* do_allocate(size_t bytes, size_t alignment);
```

> Let `CA` be an integral constant expression such that `CA == alignment`,
> is `true`, let `U` be the type `aligned_type<CA>`, and let `n` be
> `(bytes + sizeof(U) - 1) / sizeof(U)`.

> _Preconditions:_ `alignment` is a power of two.

> _Returns:_ `allocator_traits<Allocator>::template
> rebind_traits<U>::allocate(m_alloc, n)`

> _Throws:_ nothing unless the underlying allocator throws.

```cpp
void do_deallocate(void* p, size_t bytes, size_t alignment);
```

> Let `CA` be an integral constant expression such that `CA == alignment`,
> is `true`, let `U` be the type `aligned_type<CA>`, and let `n` be
> `(bytes + sizeof(U) - 1) / sizeof(U)`.

> _Preconditions_: given a memory resource `r` such that `this->is_equal(r)` is
> `true`, `p` was returned from a prior call to `r.allocate(bytes, alignment)`
> and the storage at `p` has not yet been deallocated.

> _Effects:_ `allocator_traits<Allocator>::template
> rebind_traits<U>::deallocate(m_alloc, p, n)`

```cpp
bool do_is_equal(const memory_resource& other) const noexcept;
```

> Let `p` be `dynamic_cast<const resource-adaptor-imp*>(&other)`.

> _Returns_: `false` if `p` is null; otherwise the value of `m_alloc == p->m_alloc`.

References
==========

[N4901](http://www.open-std.org/JTC1/SC22/WG21/docs/papers/2021/n4901.pdf).
Working Draft, Standard for Programming Language C++, Thomas Köppe, editor,
2021-10-23.

[N4873](http://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg21/docs/papers/2020/n4873.html)
Programming Languages - C++ Extensions for Library Fundamentals,
Version 3, Thomas Köppe, editor, 2020-11-09.

[P0339](http://wg21.link/p0339):
polymorphic_allocator<> as a vocabulary type, Pablo Halpern, 2018-04-02.

[P0987](http://wg21.link/p0987):
polymorphic_allocator<byte> instead of type-erasure, Pablo Halpern,
2018-04-02.
