% P2946R1: A Flexible Solution to the Problems of `noexcept`
% Pablo Halpern <<phalpern@halpernwightsoftware.com>>
% <!-- $TimeStamp$ -->2024-01-15 20:34 EST<!-- $ -->
Target audience: EWGI

Abstract
========

> The `noexcept` function specifier and companion `noexcept` operator were
invented to allow containers such as `vector` to provide the strong
exception-safety guarantee when performing operations that require relocating
existing elements. The `noexcept` specifier has since been utilized regularly
to improve code generation and sometimes as a form of documentation.  The
problems with these off-label uses have been known for a long time; the *Lakos
Rule*, which predated the release of C++11, was intended to prevent such use
(or misuse) within the C++ Standard Library.  This paper proposes an attribute,
`[[throws_nothing]]`, as an alternative to `noexcept` for annotating
nonthrowing functions. Being invisble to the `noexcept` operator and having
implementation-defined semantics, `[[throws_nothing]]` is a less powerful
annotation than `noexcept` that avoids the issues the Lakos Rule was
created to address.  Thus, `[[throws_nothing]]` eliminates the temptation to
abuse `noexcept` by providing a tool better suited for
improving code generation and documenting programmer intent.

Brief Sketch of the Proposed Feature
====================================

This minimal description of the `[[throws_nothing]]` feature is sufficient for
understanding the "[Motivation](motivation)" section below.  A full description
of this proposal is found in the "[Proposed Feature](proposed-feature)" section.

A new fuction attribute, `[[throws_nothing]]`, is proposed for annotating a
function that does not throw when called within a correct program. The
attribute is not detectable using the `noexcept` operator:

```C++
[[throws_nothing]] void f(int);
static_assert(noexcept(f(0)) == false);
```

Whether the program will terminate if an exception attempts to escape from `f`,
above, is implementation defined (and thus potentially user configurable).

Change log
==========

**Changes in R1 from R0 (after Kona 2023)**:

* Added an optional Boolean argument after compelling rational was presented in
  Kona.

* Added a non-normative note indicating the behavior if a function has both
  `[[throws_nothing]]` and `noexcept` annotations.

* Added (in *Alternatives considered* section) an exploration of annotating
  statements or expressions in addition to or instead of function declarations.


Motivation
==========

Purpose of `noexcept`
---------------------

The `noexcept` specifier was introduced at the end of the C++11 cycle for one
purpose: to enable the safe use of move constructors in `vector`-like
containers that offer the *strong exception-safety guarantee* for certain
operations, such as inserting elements at the end.  The problem was first
described, with `noexcept` as the proposed solution, in
[N2855](http://wg21.link/n2855). This proposal was later refined,
eventually resulting in the final wording of [N3050](http://wg21.link/n3050).

Below is one possible implementation of a vector-reallocation function, which
must leave the original vector unchanged if an exception is thrown
while trying to move elements from the old buffer to the new one. This
implementation uses `if` `constexpr` instead of the `std::move_if_noexcept`
function to make the two different code paths easier to distinguish.

```C++
template <class T, class A>
void vector<T,A>::reallocate(size_type new_capacity)
{
  using alloc_traits = allocator_traits<A>;

  pointer new_data = alloc_traits::allocate(new_capacity);

  size_type i = 0;
  if constexpr (noexcept(T(std::move(m_data[i])))) {
    for (i = 0; i < size(); ++i)
      alloc_traits::construct(&new_data[i], std::move(m_data[i])); // efficient
  }
  else try {
    for (i = 0; i < size(); ++i)
      alloc_traits::construct(&new_data[i], m_data[i]);  // copy (less efficient)
  }
  catch (...) {
    while (i)
      alloc_traits::destroy(new_data[--i]);
    alloc_traits::deallocate(new_data, new_capacity);
    throw;
  }

  // got here only if no exception was thrown
  for (i = 0; i < size(); ++i)
    alloc_traits::destroy(m_data[i]);
  alloc_traits::deallocate(m_data, m_capacity);

  m_data     = new_data;
  m_capacity = new_capacity;
}
```

The use of `T`'s move constructor can often yield algorithmic performance
advantages over using its copy constructor, sometimes reducing the cost from
*O(N)* or worse per copy to *O(1)*. Such a move constructor, however, typically
modifies the original object; if the move constructor might throw, `vector`
must degenerate to using the copy constructor, and thus give up the performance gain
to ensure that it can leave the original object in its initial state.  Because
`vector<T, A>::reallocate` is a *generic* function, using `std::move` and
retaining the strong guarantee in the code above would be impossible if we did
not have the `noexcept` operator.

The Lakos Rule
--------------

Since the `noexcept` annotation was added late in the C++11 cycle and was thus
brand new and not fully
understood, applying it appropriately in the Standard Library was a
challenge. John Lakos and Alisdair Meredith proposed what has become known as
the *Lakos Rule* (described in [N3279](http://wg21.link/N3279) and extended in
[P0884](http://wg21.link/P0884)).  Summarized below, the Lakos Rule provided a
conservative framework for deciding whether a specific function may safely be
declared `noexcept`.

 * If a function has no preconditions (a *wide contract*) and is guaranteed not
   to throw (via an explicit "*Throws*: nothing" clause), it may be declared
   `noexcept`.
 * If a function has preconditions (a *narrow contract*) or if it might
   throw when called correctly (*in contract*), it must *not* be declared
   `noexcept`.

The example below shows a subset of the `std::vector` interface. Note that only
`size()`, which promises not to throw and has no preconditions, is declared
`noexcept`, whereas the others each fail one or both of the Lakos Rule tests
and are thus not `noexcept`.

```C++
template <class T, class A>
class vector {
   // ...
   constexpr size_type size() const noexcept; // wide contract,   doesn't throw
   constexpr reference at(size_type);         // wide contract,   might throw
   constexpr reference operator[](size_type); // narrow contract, doesn't throw
   constexpr reference front();               // narrow contract, doesn't throw
};
```

Resistance to the Lakos Rule
----------------------------

Although the Lakos Rule is effective and has strong theoretical and practical
underpinnings (e.g., enabling certain backward-compatible extensions and
conforming wider interfaces, see [P2861](http://wg21.link/P2861)), two reasons
have emerged for violating it.

 1. Under many (but by no means all) circumstances, calling a `noexcept`
    function
    generates less code.  Thus, programmers --- both within and outside WG21
    --- want to use `noexcept` to improve code generation, yet
    the author has seen no compelling evidence that `noexcept` produces
    measurably *faster* code on any modern platforms.

 2. Within WG21, concern has been voiced that the distinction between
    "*Throws*: nothing" and `noexcept` is unclear (see
    [P1656](http://wg21.link/P1656)).

As tempting as it might be, violating the Lakos rule is ill advised unless a
compelling case can be made that querying the function with the `noexcept`
operator is necessary for optimizing or ensuring correctness of a generic
algorithm at compile time. As described in [P2861](http://wg21.link/P2861), if
`noexcept` is added to a
function in one version of the Standard, it cannot be removed in a future
version without potentially breaking code.  Specifically,
widening the contract of a function to add new functionality is safe,
provided that every program written for the old version has the same
observable behavior when compiled with the new version, but if the
old version is annotated with `noexcept`, the new version cannot be
widened to accept new values that would result in an exception being thrown.

Moreover immediate forced termination is not option in some environments. In
such an environment, a defensive programming library (or language contract
facility) might want to throw an exception on a precondition violation --- even
within a function that would not otherwise throw --- so that the program can
shut down gracefully or even soldier on. This ability to continue after a logic
error has been detected is especially useful when testing the precondition
checks themselves. The `noexcept` specifier interferes with such a throwing
defensive-programming facility (see [P2831R0](http://wg21.link/P2831R0)).

Serving the C++ Multiverse
--------------------------

The goal of this proposal is to address the constituencies within the different
C++ universes (the C++ multiverse) that have been ill served by `noexcept`
alone, such as embedded-software developers who want smaller code and those who need to
avoid immediate termination of their programs (e.g., upon detecting contract
violations).  What is needed is a way to provide the
desired code-generation and documentation benefits of `noexcept` without
violating either the spirit or the letter of the Lakos Rule.

### The embedded-software development universe

The reduction in generated-code size that usually results from annotating a
called function with `noexcept` or `[[throws_nothing]]` has the most impact in
memory-constrained environments.  WG21 members often assert that embedded-software developers
turn off exceptions in their builds because the code-size cost of leaving them
enabled is too large. Unfortunately, this assumption has led to a self-fulfilling
prophecy: WG21 does nothing to make exceptions friendlier for embedded
programmers, so embedded programmers, in turn, eschew exceptions.

Since even an embedded microprocessor may have several megabytes of RAM
available to it, completely turning off exceptions is not always
necessary. Given an appropriate C++ implementation, judicious use of the
`[[throws_nothing]]` attribute can help an executable stay within its memory
budget while following the best design practices, including the Lakos Rule.

### The graceful-termination universe

In high-data-integrity environments, it is often unacceptable to terminate
suddenly when encountering an error. To avoid data corruption, resources must
be released, transactions rolled back, and user data saved, before aborting.
If any of these actions would normally occur in a destructor of an RAII object,
then such a graceful shutdown could not be accomplished readily in a terminate
handler.

Imagine a defensive-programming library comprising an `assert`-like macro and a
custom function to handle assertion failures:

```C++
void assert_failure_handler(const char* file, unsigned line, const char* func,
                            const char* expression)
{
  std::cerr << file << ':' << line << ": in function " << func
            << ": assertion failure " << expression << std::endl;

  throw assert_failure_exception(file, line, func, expression);
}

#ifdef CHECKED_MODE
# define ASSERT(cond) cond ? (void) 0 : \
    assert_failure_handler(__FILE__, __LINE__, __FUNCTION__, #cond)
#else
# define ASSERT(cond) (void) 0
#endif
```

Now, imagine an integer absolute-value function, `intAbs`, having the
precondition that the input is not `INT_MIN`, because the absolute value of
`INT_MIN` is not representable in an `int`. When called in contract, `intAbs`
does not throw an exception, so it is declared with
`[[throws_nothing]]`. Within the function body, `intAbs` checks its
precondition using the above `ASSERT`:

```C++
// Return absolute value of x.  Precondition: x is not `INT_MIN`.
[[throws_nothing]] int intAbs(int x)
{
  ASSERT(x != INT_MIN);  // precondition check
  return x < 0 ? -x : x;
}
```

Code using this function might have a subtle bug that is detected only during
beta testing (when real user data is at stake):

```C++
    int thing = read_thing();
    // Oops! Forgot to sanitize our input!
    thing = intAbs(thing);  // Precondition check might fail.
```

To trigger the precondition check without suddenly terminating the program,
`[[throws_nothing]]` must allow the assert-failure exception to escape. The
organization would thus choose a C++ implementation that ignores
`[[throws_nothing]]`, thus allowing exceptions to propagate. By disabling the
enforcement of `[[throws_nothing]]`, only the behavior of erroneous code is
changed; the essential behavior is unaffected, although larger code size might
be observed.

### The must-not-terminate universe

Some programs must not terminate at all, ever. For example, a game engine might
continue running its main event loop after an error is detected, even if
continuing would result in a momentary glitch on the screen. The universe of
such programs has similar requirements to the graceful-termination universe;
unexpected exceptions thrown from presumably nonthrowing functions should not
terminate the program but release resources in an orderly way, then continue.

Test drivers are an important subset of the must-not-terminate universe.  A
precondition check, like any other aspect of a function, should be tested ---
i.e., by providing inputs at the boundaries of the precondition --- including
deliberately violating it. When every precondition violation causes program
termination, writing a portable and efficient test driver is not possible,
as described in [P2831R0](http://wg21.link/P2831R0).

Given the defensive-programming library and `intAbs` function from the
"[The graceful-termination universe](the-graceful-termination-universe)"
section above, a white-box unit test for `intAbs` could test that the `ASSERT`
correctly encodes the documented precondition.  Using a throwing failure
handler (as shown in `assert_failure_handler`), the test engineer would write a
negative test that deliberately violates the precondition:

```C++
bool testPreconditionViolation()
{
  try {
    intAbs(INT_MIN);
    return false; // failed to catch the precondition violation
  }
  catch (const assert_failure_exception&) {
    return true;  // successfully caught the precondition violation
  }
}
```

The test engineer would, as in the previous section, choose a C++
implementation that ignores `[[throws_nothing]]`, thus allowing the
precondition check to detect the deliberate error without terminating the test
program. Because `[[throws_nothing]]`, unlike `noexcept`, cannot be used to
change the program logic within the caller, test engineers can have
reasonable confidence that they are fully testing the function, even if the
final program is eventually deployed using an implementation that terminates on
a `[[throws_nothing]]` violation.

### The library-specification universe

A number of features in C++ that are intended to reduce errors or improve code
generation have the side effect of making code more self-documenting. For
example, `const` indicates --- to both the compiler and human reader --- that a
variable's value will not change, and the `assert` macro documents an invariant
of an algorithm in a way that is enforceable at run time. Similarly,
`[[throws_nothing]]` indicates, at a glance, that a function will not throw
when called in contract; both the implementation and the human reader benefit.

Within the C++ Standard Library, functions having "*Throws*: nothing" as part
of their description could be annotated with `[[throws_nothing]]`. Whether such
a practice would add clarity is a matter for LWG to decide.


Proposed Feature
================

A Standard attribute, tentatively named `[[throws_nothing]]` and appertaining
to function declarations, is proposed to indicate that a function is specified
not to throw when all its preconditions are met (i.e., it is called *in
contract*):

```C++
[[throws_nothing]] void f(int);
```

The `[[throws_nothing]]` attribute takes an optional argument that is a
constant expression contextually convertible to `bool`, where
`[[throws_nothing(false)]]` is equivalent to omitting the attribute:

```C++
// A call to `f2<T>` is declared never to throw if `T` is trivially copyable.
template <class T>
[[throws_nothing(std::is_trivially_copyable_v<T>)]] void f2(const T&);
```

The presence of the `[[throws_nothing]]` attribute cannot be queried by the
program itself at compile time; the result of the `noexcept` operator and the
function type are unchanged:

```C++
[[throws_nothing]] void g1(int);
static_assert(noexcept(g1(0)) == false);

[[throws_nothing]] void g2(int) noexcept;
static_assert(noexcept(g2(0)) == true);

[[throws_nothing]] void g3(int) noexcept(false);
static_assert(noexcept(g3(0)) == false);

[[throws_nothing(false)]] void g4(int);
static_assert(std::is_same_v<decltype(g1), decltype(g4)>);
```

Intentionally making `[[throws_nothing]]` invisible to the `noexcept` operator
prevents using  `[[throws_nothing]]` to select an algorithm at compile time; the attribute does
not change the *essential behavior*[^essential] of a correct program and can be
removed from a subsequent version of a function, provided the behavior of the
function does not change for any previously valid inputs.

[^essential]: Essential behavior comprises the promised behavior of a function
when called in contract.  The return value, guaranteed side effects, and
complexity guaranties are part of essential behavior.  The layout of objects,
number of instructions executed, and logging are rarely part of a function's
essential
behavior. The effects of calling the function out of contract are *never* part
of essential behavior.

If a `[[throws_nothing]]` function attempts to exit via an exception, then
whether `std::terminate` is called or the annotation is ignored (and the
exception propagates normally) is implementation defined. The recommended
best practice is to make both semantics available to the user.
If, however, the function is also annotated with
`noexcept` or `noexcept(true)`, `std::terminate` is always called,
regardless of the implementation's semantic for `[[throws_nothing]]`.

By making the behavior of an incorrect program --- one that attempts to throw
from a `[[throws_nothing]]` function --- implementation defined, rather than
always terminating, the behavior can vary to serve the multiple constituencies
of the C++ multiverse. On an implementation that calls `std::terminate`, a call
to a function annotated with `[[throws_nothing]]` is likely to result in
smaller generated code compared to one with no annotation at all. Conversely,
an implementation that ignores the attribute allows for graceful shutdown,
log-and-continue semantics, and effective testing of contract checks in
functions that would not otherwise throw.

As with `noexcept` currently, implementations of the Standard Library would be
permitted to use `[[throws_nothing]]` for any nonthrowing function, even though
the Standard itself would never mandate its use. In fact, for discretionary use
by implementations, `[[throws_nothing]]` is much better than the `noexcept`
specifier because `[[throws_nothing]]` cannot inadvertently change the meaning
of a correct program and is responsive to the settings used to build the
program.


Feature comparison
------------------

For functions that promise not to throw, the table below compares
`[[throws_nothing]]` to `noexcept` and to using no annotation at all
(*unmarked*). *If terminate* means *yes* for implementations that terminate on
unexpected exceptions and *no* otherwise. *If ignore* means *yes* for
implementations that ignore the annotation and *no* otherwise.

The purpose of the
table is not to show that one annotation is better than the other, but that,
despite some overlap, they serve different purposes and therefore support
different use cases, none of which violate the Lakos Rule.

|                                           |unmarked | `noexcept` | `[[throws_nothing]]` |
| ----------------------------------------- | ------- | ---------- | -------------------- |
| Makes function self-documenting           | no      | yes        | yes                  |
| Provides codegen hint to compiler         | no      | yes        | if terminate         |
| Terminates on unexpected exception        | no      | yes        | if terminate         |
| Suitable for wide contracts               | yes     | yes        | yes                  |
| Suitable for narrow contracts             | yes     | no         | yes                  |
| Compatible with graceful shutdown         | yes     | no         | if ignore            |
| Compatible with log-and-continue          | yes     | no         | if ignore            |
| Compatible with throwing defensive checks | yes     | no         | if ignore            |
| Supports compile-time algorithm selection | no      | yes        | no                   |

Syntax and spelling
-------------------

The `[[throws_nothing]]` annotation fits well with the conventional notion of
an attribute: Removing the attribute has no essential effect on a correct
program (see [P2552R3](http://wg21.link/P2552R3)). Rendering this functionality as
a keyword or contextual keyword seems unnecessary.

Putting the `[[throws_nothing]]` attribute in the same location as
`noexcept` would seem logical, but for an attribute to appertain to a function, the
attribute must occur either before the function declaration or immediately
after the function identifier:

```C++
[[throws_nothing]] void f(int);   // OK
void g [[throws_nothing]] (int);  // OK
void h(int) [[throws_nothing]];   // ERROR: improper attribute placement
```

The original spelling for the attribute was `[[does_not_throw]]`, which (for
people who count keystrokes) happens
to have the same number of characters as `[[throws_nothing]]`. The name was
changed to `[[throws_nothing]]` to match the "*Throws*: nothing" phrasing that
LWG uses when documenting functions that do not throw.

The optional Boolean argument works like the optional argument to `noexcept`
and enables a function template to make a nothrow promise only when certain
conditions are true.


Alternatives Considered
=======================

Switching `noexcept` on and off with a constant expression
----------------------------------------------------------

One use of `[[does_not_throw]]` is to allow defensive checks to throw an
exception through an otherwise-nonthrowing interface. One proposed way to
achieve this behavior for nonthrowing functions is to use `noexcept` in such a
way that it can be turned off when desired.  This approach can be implemented
with the help of the preprocessor. For example, using the framework described in
"[The unit testing universe](the-unit-testing-universe)" section, `noexcept` can
be turned off when `CHECKED_MODE` is defined:

```C++
#ifdef CHECKED_MODE
inline constexpr bool does_not_throw = false;
#else
inline constexpr bool does_not_throw = true;
#endif

void f(int i) noexcept(does_not_throw)  // BAD IDEA!
{
  ASSERT(i < 0);
  // ...
}
```

With this approach, the expression `noexcept(f(0))` will yield different
results depending on the `CHECKED_MODE` macro, possibly resulting in different
logic paths for debug and release builds, and will thus violate the principle
that essential
behavior must not be changed by build modes --- a principle convincingly
advocated for in [P2831R0](http://wg21.link/P2831R0) and
[P2834R0](http://wg21.link/P2834R0) and named, by the latter, *Build-Mode
Independence*.

Having on attribute on an expression rather than a function
-----------------------------------------------------------

Having a syntax to indicate that a statement or an expression does not throw at
the point of invocation is intriguing. The same `[[throws_nothing]]` attribute
could conceivably be applied to a statement:

```C++
std::vector v{ 1, 2, 3 };

for (std::size_t i = 0; i < v.size(); ++i)
{
  int x1;
  [[throws_nothing]] x1 = v.at(i);  // Will not throw
  y = f(i);
  int x2 = v.at(y);  // Might throw
}
```

This paper does not propose such an extension, as we have no experience with
anything similar. Moreover, the abuse of `noexcept` is a problem we have today
and which gets worse with every additional instance. There is clear benefit to
being able to annotate function declarations and implementability is not in
question; there is much less clarity about the benefits or implementability
of statement- or expression-level nothrow annotations. Consideration of these
other annotations are orthogonal to the function-declaration attribute, so we
should not delay this proposal as they are considered.

In the mean time some of the potential benefits can be explored by using
lambda expressions:

```C++
   x1 = [&] [[throws_nothing]] { return v.at(i) }();  // Will not throw
```


Effects on the Standard Library
===============================

No changes would be needed immediately in the C++23 Standard Library if
`[[throws_nothing]]` were adopted. LWG can discuss whether to replace or
augment "*Throws*: nothing" in the description with `[[throws_nothing]]` in the
interface of functions having narrow contracts that promise not to throw when
called in contract.

An immediate change to the C++26 Working Paper might be necessary if any
narrow-contract functions
targeted for C++26 are currently annotated with `noexcept`; perhaps those
annotations should be changed to `[[throws_nothing]]` or perhaps the Standard
should omit the annotation and leave it up to the implementation to decide
whether to use `[[throws_nothing]]`.  Violations of the Lakos Rule already in
C++23 could be handled on a case-by-case basis (via DRs). Minimizing such
violations would result in greater stability across implementations and
versions of the Standard.


Implementation Experience
=========================

At present, no compilers implement this feature. If this paper receives a
favorable response in EWGI, we will implement the proposed facility before
presenting
it to EWG. Implementation is expected to be a fairly simple delta on the
existing implementation of `noexcept`.


Formal Wording
==============

Changes are relative to the December 2023 Working Paper,
[N4971](http://wg21.link/N4971).

**Note**: This wording is known to be incomplete,  Open issues are
called out when possible.

Insert the following note somewhere within paragraph 5 of **[except.spec]**:

> [*Note*: The `[[throws_nothing]]` attribute is not a non-throwing
> specification. --- *end note*]

Insert the following new paragraph after paragraph 5 of **[except.spec]**:

> Whenever an exception is thrown and the search for a handler
([except.handle]) encounters the outermost block of a function previously
declared with the `throws_nothing` attribute having no *attribute-argument* or
an *attribute-argument* that evaluates to `true`, it is implementation-defined
whether the function `std::terminate` is invoked ([except.terminate]). If the
`throws_nothing` attribute has an *attribute-argument* that evaluates to
`false`, it has no effect on exception handling.
[ *Note*: If the function has a *non-throwing exception specification* ([except.spec])
`std:terminate` is invoked regardless of the implementation-specified behavior
of `throws_nothing` --- *end note*]

**Open issue**: In Kona, there was not much support for allowing
`[[throws_nothing]]` on function pointers.  Implicitly, then, an indirect call
cannot take advantage of `[[throws_nothing]]` unless the compiler can prove
that the function pointer points to a `[[throws_nothing]]` function.  Does
anything (normative or non-normative) need to be said about a function called
indirectly via a function pointer?

Insert the following new subsection within the **[dcl.attr]** section:

> **Throws nothing attribute [dcl.attr.throwsnothing]**

> The *attribute-token* `throws_nothing` specifies whether a function can exit
via an exception.

> An *attribute-argument* clause may be present and, if present it shall have
the form

>> ( *constant-expression* )

> The *constant-expression* shall be contextually convertible to
`bool`. The absence of an *attribute-argument* is treated as equivalent to
`( true )`.

> The attribute may be applied to a function or a lambda call operator. The
first declaration of a function shall specify the `throws_nothing` attribute if
any declaration of that function specifies the `throws_nothing` attribute. If a
function is declared with the `throws_nothing` attribute in one translation
unit and the same function is declared with a different `throws_nothing`
attribute or without the `throws_nothing` attribute in another translation
unit, the program is ill-formed, no diagnostic required.  The effects of the
`throws_nothing` attribute is described in [except.spec].

> [*Note 1*:
Unlike the exception specification of a function ([except.spec]), whether a
function is marked with `throws_nothing` has no effect on the function's type
and is not observable through the `noexcept` operator ([expr.unary.noexcept]).
--- *end note*]

> *Recommended practice*: An implementation should provide to users the ability
to translate a program such that all instances of `throws_nothing` result in
`std::terminate` being invoked as described above. An implementation should
further provide to users the ability to translate a program such that all
instances of `throws_nothing` are ignored. The value of a
*has-attribute-expression* for the `throws_nothing` attribute should be `0`
if, for a given implementation, the `throws_nothing` attribute never causes
`std::terminate` to be invoked.

**Rationale**: The *Recommended Practice* wording is consistent with proposed
wording for the Contracts facility; see [P2877R0](http:/wg21.link/P2877R0).

> [*Example 1*:

```C++
      template <class Tp>
      [[ throws_nothing(std::is_unsigned_v<Tp>) ]] void f(Tp x) {
        if (x < 0)
          throw "negative"; // Normal exception for signed Tp
        else if (x > 100)
          throw "too big";  // Normal for signed Tp, else implementation-defined
      }

      static_assert(noexcept(f(-1) == false));  // OK, attribute is not queryable.
```

> --- *end example*]

Conclusion
==========

The `noexcept` specifier is problematic because it can be queried via the
`noexcept` operator, which means that it cannot be changed without changing the
meaning of a client program. Moreover, the consequence of violating a
`noexcept` specification is immediate program termination.  By creating similar
feature, `[[throws_nothing]]`, that differs only in that it (1) cannot be
queried and (2) can be ignored without violating its semantics, we enable
optimizing for multiple distinct universes; adopting this proposal achieves the
wants and needs of the multiverse.

Acknowledgments
===============

Thanks to John Lakos, Joshua Berne, Brian Bi, Mungo Gill, Timur Doumler, and
Lori Hughes for reviewing this paper and offering useful improvements.  Thanks
to Timur Doumler for providing most of the formal wording and Nina Ranns and
Joshua Berne for reviewing the wording.
