---
title: "Better lookups for `map` and `unordered_map`"
document: D3091R1
date: <!-- $TimeStamp$ -->2024-03-09 18:56 EST<!-- $ -->
audience: LEWGI
author:
  - name: Pablo Halpern
    email: <phalpern@halpernwightsoftware.com>
working-draft: N4971
---

Abstract
========

The most convenient way to look up an element of a `map` or `unordered_map` is
to use the index operator, i.e., `theMap[key]`. This operator cannot be used,
however, when 1) the container is `const`, 2) the mapped type is not
default-constructible, 3) the default-constructed value is inappropriate for
the context, or 4) the container should not be  modified. These limitations
often force the user resort to the `find` member function, which returns an
iterator that points to a `pair` and typically leads to more complex code
having at least one `if` statement and/or duplicate lookup operations. Taking
inspiration from other languages, especially Python, this paper proposes a
`get` member function that returns `optional<T&>` and leverages the observers
and monadic operations of `optional` to simplify lookups for `map` and
`unordered_map`. In addition, a new `or_construct` observer function is
proposed for `optional` to expand the set of common use-cases for `get`.  Note
that this proposal is built on `optional<T&>`, which is described in [@P2988R3]
and is not yet in the C++ Working Paper.

Change Log
==========

**R1** (post 2024-02-27 LEWGI teleconference)

- As a result of discussions in LEWGI on 27 Feb 2024, the return value of `get`
  was changed from `mapped_type` to `optional<mapped_type&>` and the
  functionality of `get_ref` and `get_as` were delegated to `optional`. Note
  that `optional<T&>` is not valid in C++23, but is proposed in [@P2988R3] for
  C++26.
- Added a proposed `or_construct` member to `optional`.
- Proposes an enhancement of `optional<T&>::value_or` over that in [@P2988R3].
- Added feature-test macros.

**R0** (pre-Tokyo mailing)

- Initial version

Motivation
==========

Just about every modern computer language has, as part of the language or its
standard library, one or more associative containers that uniquely maps a
key to a value value, variously called `map`, `hash_map`, `dictionary`, or
something similar. In C++ we have `std::map`, `std::unordered_map`, and
eventually (per [@P0429R9] and [@P2767R2]) `std::flat_map`. The easy-to-write
and easy-to-read expression for getting a value for an associated key is
simply, `theMap[key]`; in other words, a mapped value is retrieved (and
often set) using the index operator, which returns a reference to the value
associated with the key. Unfortunately, the index operator in the C++
associative containers has a number of shortcomings compared to many other
languages:

* It works only for non-`const` containers.
* It works only for default-constructible mapped types
* The default-constructed object (when available) is not always the correct
  identity for a given use case.
* It modifies the container when the key is absent.

Consider a `std::map` named `theMap`, that maps an integer key to
a floating-point value, modeling a sparse array of `double`. If we want to find
the largest of the `double` values mapped to the integer keys in the range 1 to
100, we might be tempted to write the following loop:

```cpp
double largest = -std::numeric_limits<double>::infinity();
for (int i = 1; i <= 100; ++i)
  largest = std::max(largest, theMap[i]);
```

If `theMap` is `const`, the loop will not compile. If any of the keys in the
range `[1, 100]` are absent from the map, then `theMap[i]` will return a
default-constructed `double` having value 0.0, which might or might not
be desirable, depending on whether we want to treat missing values as truly
having value 0.0 or whether they should be ignored (or, equivalently, treated
as having value *-infinity*). Finally if, before executing this loop, `theMap`
contains only, say, 5 entries, at the end of the loop it will contain at
least 100 entries, most of whose values will be zero.

There are alternatives that avoid all of these shortcomings, but the
alternatives are significantly less elegant, and therefore more
error prone.  For example, the `at` member function looks a lot like
`operator[]` and has none of the above shortcomings, but missing keys are
handled by throwing exceptions, making it impractical for situations other than
when the key is almost certain to exist. Moreover, a `try`-`catch` block within
a loop is rarely a clean way to structure code:

```cpp
double largest = -std::numeric_limits<double>::infinity();
for (int i = 1; i <= 100; ++i)
{
  try {
    largest = std::max(largest, theMap.at(i));
  } catch (const std::out_of_range&) { }
}
```

The above code would work with a `const` map, would ignore missing elements
(rather than treating them as zeros), and would not populate the map with
useless entries, but many would argue that the loop is inelegant, at best. In
most C++ implementations, it would be extremely inefficient unless key misses
are rare.

The other obvious alternative uses the `find` member function:

```cpp
double largest = -std::numeric_limits<double>::infinity();
for (int i = 1; i <= 100; ++i)
{
  auto iter = theMap.find(i);
  if (iter != theMap.end())
    largest = std::max(largest, iter->second);
}
```

This version of the loop is only slightly more verbose than our starting point
and avoids all of the issues, but the use of iterators, the need to call *two*
member functions (`find` and `end`), and having to extract the `second` member
of the element `pair` for what should be a *simple* operation increases the
cognitive load on both the programmer and the reader. Moreover, a generic use
of `find` can yield a subtle bug.  Consider the following function template,
`f`.

```cpp
template <class Key, class Value>
void f(const Key& k, const std::map<Key, Value>& aMap)
{
  Value obj = @_some-default-obj-value-expression_@;
  auto iter = aMap.find(k);
  if (iter != aMap.end())
    obj = iter->second;
  // code that uses `obj` ...
}
```

An instantiation of `f` will not compile unless `Value` is
copy-assignable. Worse, unless tested with a non-assignable type, the bug could
go undetected for a long time. One fix would be initialize `obj` in a single
expression:

```cpp
Value obj = aMap.count(k) ? aMap.at(k) : @_some-default-obj-value-expression_@;
```

While correct, this solution involves two lookup operations: One for the
`count` and one for the `at`.  A better fix requires a bit more code:

```cpp
auto iter = aMap.find(k);
Value obj = iter != aMap.end() ? iter->second : @_some-default-obj-value-expression_@;
```

Note that the last solution again involves `iterator`, `pair`, and a
conditional expression, which is a far cry from the simplicity of `operator[]`.

Let's contrast these less-than-ideal map lookups to dictionary lookups in
Python. One way to write the largest-value computation in Python would be:

```python
inf = float("inf")
largest = -inf
for i in range(1, 101):
    largest = max(largest, theMap.get(i, -inf))
```

The `get` member of Python's dictionary type looks up the supplied key (first
argument). If the key exists in the dictionary, it returns the corresponding
value; otherwise, `get` returns the specified alternative value (second
argument).

In this paper, I propose a `get` member function for `std::map` and
`std::unordered_map` similar to the `get` member in Python
dictionaries. Because C++ does not have a `None` value like Python's, `get`
returns an `optional` instead, and delegates the construction of an alternative
return value to the `optional`.

Proposed feature
================

Overview
--------

What's desired is a simple expression that, given a key, returns the mapped
value if the key exists in a specific map and a user-supplied *alternative
value* if the key does not exist. The proposed feature is a `get` member
function for `map` and `unordered_map` that returns `optional<T&>` (or, for a
`const` map, `optional<const T&>`):

```cpp
template<class Key, class T, class Compare = less<Key>,
         class Allocator = allocator<pair<const Key, T>>>
class map {
  // ...
  optional<      mapped_type&> get(const key_type& k);
  optional<const mapped_type&> get(const key_type& k) const;
  //...
};
```

These functions depend on having an `optional` template that can be
instantiated with reference types, as proposed in [@P2988R3].

Using this feature, the earlier example could be written as follows.

```cpp
double negative_inf = -std::numeric_limits<double>::infinity();
double largest = negative_inf;
for (int i = 1; i <= 100; ++i)
  largest = std::max(largest, theMap.get(i).value_or(negative_inf));
```

Returning a Different but Compatible Reference Type
---------------------------------------------------

The return value of `value_or` is `T&` (as proposed in [@P2988R3]). That means
that the returned value can be modified, which can be very useful, even though
the modification does not always affect the `map`:

```cpp
std::map<std::string, int> theMap{ ... };
// Increment the entries matching `names`, but only if they are already in `theMap`.
for (const std:string& name : names) {
  int temp = 0;
  ++theMap.get(name).value_or(temp);  // increment through reference
  // Possibly-modified value of `temp` is discarded.
}
```

Sometimes, however, the definition of `value_or` for `optional<T&>` described
in [@P2988R3] is difficult to use. If `T` is non-const, a valid-looking and
useful call could be rejected by the compiler:

```cpp
const int zero = 0;
std::optional<int&> x;
const int& r1 = x.value_or(zero);  // Error: `const int&` not convertible to `int&`
const int& r2 = std::optional<const int&>(x).value_or(zero);  // OK
```

The error constructing `r1` is annoying, and the workaround for `r2` is
inelegant. It would be much more convenient, while remaining safe, for
`optional<T&>::value_or(U&&)` to return an lvalue of type
`common_reference_t<T&, U>`.  Modifying `value_or` in this way would allow not
only `const` lvalue arguments, but also base classes of `T`:

```cpp
struct Base { ... }
struct Derived : Base { ... };

Base alt{ ... };
std::opt<Derived&> theOpt;
auto& ref = theOpt.value_or(alt);  // `ref` has type `Base&`
```

This change to `optional<T&>::value_or` has been suggested to the authors of
P2988 and is also part of the wording in this paper.

Returning an Rvalue
-------------------

Revisiting the earlier example for finding the largest entry in a range, we
note that, although `value_or` works when passed an lvalue,

```cpp
  largest = std::max(largest, theMap.get(i).value_or(@**negative_inf**@));
```

the following code will not compile, even though it appears to be equivalent.

```cpp
  largest = std::max(largest, theMap.get(i).value_or(@**-std::numeric_limits<double>::infinity()**@);
```

The problem is that when an `optional` holds a reference, the argument to
`value_or` must be an lvalue of compatible type, whereas `infinity()` returns
an rvalue. Moreover, even for an `optional` that holds a non-reference,
`value_or` accepts only a single argument rather than an `emplace`-like list of
constructor arguments, potentially requiring that the return value be first
constructed, then moved (or worse, copied). Both problems are solved with
additional `or_construct` member function that has a variadic list of
constructor arguments and returns an rvalue by default, regardless of whether
`T` is a reference:

```cpp
template <class U = remove_cvref_t<T>, class... Args>
  U or_construct(Args&&... args);
template <class U = remove_cvref_t<T>, class... Args>
  U or_construct(Args&&... args) const;
```

The return value for `or_construct` is constructed from the `optional` value if
`has_value()` is true, otherwise it is constructed from
`std::forward<Args>(args)...`.

Using `or_construct` instead of `value_or`, would yield this working code:

```cpp
double largest = -std::numeric_limits<double>::infinity();
for (int i = 1; i <= 100; ++i)
  largest = std::max(largest,
                     theMap.get(i).@**or_construct**@(-std::numeric_limits<double>::infinity()));
```

Returning a Type Other than `mapped_type`
-----------------------------------------

Although the return type of `optional<T>::or_construct` defaults to `T`, the
user can explicitly specify a different return type. This feature is useful
when the desired type is *convertible from* `T` and where a more efficient
construction is possible for the alternative value. An emblematic example is
`std::string_view`. It is very efficient to construct a `string_view` directly
from a `char` array or directly from an `std::string`, but very inefficient to
first convert a `char` array to `std::string` *and then* construct a
`string_view` from the resulting `string`. By specifying `std::string_view` as
the return type, `or_construct` can be called with `std::string` as `T` and
`char[]` as the alternative value, without generating temporary objects:

```cpp
std::optional<std::string> theOpt;
std::string_view sv1 = theOpt.or_construct<std::string_view>("empty");

std::map<int, std::string> theMap{ ... };
std::string_view sv2 = theMap.get(key).or_construct<std::string_view>("none");
```

The example above creates the resulting `std::string_view` objects either from
the `std::string` stored in the optional or from the `const char[]`
passed as the alternative value, without creating an intervening `std::string`.
Not only would conversion to an intermediate `std::string` it be inefficient,
such a conversion would create problems with object lifetimes:

```cpp
// BUG (silent): Dangling reference constructing `string_view` from temporary `string`
std::string_view sv1 = theOpt.or_construct("none");

// Error (ill-formed): cannot convert `char[]` rvalue to `string` lvalue
std::string_view sv2 = theMap.get(key).value_or("none");
```

If the specified return type is a reference, then `or_construct` behaves much
like `value_or`, except that the return type is exactly the specified type,
rather than the deduced common reference type between `T&` and the alternative
argument:

```cpp
std::optional<int&> theOpt;
const int zero = 0;

auto& v1 = theOpt.value_or(zero);                 // OK
auto& v2 = theOpt.or_construct<int&>(zero);       // ERROR: `const` mismatch
auto& v3 = theOpt.or_construct<const int&>(zero); // OK
```

Before/After Comparisons
========================

The following tables shows how operations are simplified using the proposed new
member functions. In these examples `K`, `T`, and `U` are object types; `m` is
an object of (possibly `const`) `std::map<K, T>`, `unordered_map<K, T>` or
`flat_map<K, T>`, `k` is a value compatible with `K`, `v` is an lvalue of type
(possibly `const`) `T`, and `a1..aN` are arguments that can used to construct
an object of type `T`.

::: cmptable

### Before

```cpp
auto iter = m.find(k);
T x = iter == m.end() ? T{} : iter->second;
```

### After/Alternative

```cpp
T x = m.get(k).or_construct();
```

---

```cpp
auto iter = m.find(k);
T x = iter == m.end() ?
    T(a1...aN) : iter->second;
```

```cpp
T x = m.get(k).or_construct(a1...aN);
```

---

```cpp
auto iter = m.find(k);
T& x = iter == m.end() ? v : iter->second;
```

```cpp
T& x = m.get(k.value_or(v));
```

---

```cpp
map<K, vector<U>> m{ ... };
auto iter = m.find(k);
span<U> x = iter == m.end() ?
    span<U>{} : iter->second;
```

```cpp
map<K, vector<U>> m{ ... };
span<U> x = m.get(k).or_construct<span<U>>();
```

---

```cpp
map<K, vector<U>> m{ ... };
const array<U, N> preset{ ... };
auto iter = m.find(k);
span<const U> x = iter == m.end() ?
    span<const U>(preset) : iter->second;
```

```cpp
map<K, vector<U>> m{ ... };
const array<U, N> preset{ ... };
span<const U> x =
  m.get(k).or_construct<span<const U>>(preset);
```

---

```cpp
unordered_map<K, U*> m{ ... };
auto iter = m.find(k);
if (iter != m.end()) {
  U* p = iter->second;
  // ...
}
```

```cpp
unordered_map<K, U*> m{ ... };
U* p = m.get(k).or_construct(nullptr);
if (p) {
  // ...
}
```

---

```cpp
auto iter = m.find(k);
if (iter != m.end()) {
  T& r = iter->second;
  // ...
}
```

```cpp
auto q = m.get(k);
if (q) {
  T& r = *q;
  // ...
}
```

:::

Alternatives considered
=======================

Names
-----

The name `map::get` is borrowed from the Python dictionary member of the same
name.  Other names considered were `get_optional`, `lookup`, and
`lookup_optional`. The `get` name was selected for conciseness and familiarity,
but `lookup` is also concise and a reasonable alternative.

The name `optional<T>::or_construct` was selected for consistency with the
monadic operations `and_then` and `or_else`.  However, we might consider
`value_or_construct` as an intuitive extension of `value_or`.

Build Get-value-or-return-alternative Functionality Directly into `map`
-----------------------------------------------------------------------

Version R0 of this paper proposed `get`, `get_ref`, and `get_as` member
functions that would look up a key and return the corresponding value or (or
reference to the corresponding value) or else construct an alternative from
the non-key arguments, without involving `optional<T&>`:

```cpp
template <class... Args>
  mapped_type get(const key_type& key, Args&&... args) const;

// Return by reference
template <class Arg>
  common_reference_t<mapped_type&,       Arg> get_ref(const key_type& key, Arg&& ref);
template <class Arg>
  common_reference_t<const mapped_type&, Arg> get_ref(const key_type& key, Arg&& ref) const;

template <class U, class... Args>
  U get_as(const key_type& key, Args&&... args);
template <class U, class... Args>
  U get_as(const key_type& key, Args&&... args) const;
```

It was later pointed out that the `get_as` functionality could be merged into
`get` by adding a defaulted `U` parameter to `get`:

```cpp
template <class U = remove_cvref_t<T>, class... Args>
  U get(const key_type& key, Args&&... args);
template <class U = remove_cvref_t<T>, class... Args>
  U get(const key_type& key, Args&&... args) const;
```

The following table shows the usage of the R0 design compared to the
currently proposed design.

::: cmptable

### R0 design (`get` returns `T`)

```cpp
auto tval = theMap.get(k);
```

### Current design (`get` returns `optional<T&>`)

```cpp
auto tval = theMap.get(k).or_construct();
```

---

```cpp
auto tval = theMap.get(k, cT1, cT2);
```

```cpp
auto tval =
    theMap.get(k).or_construct(cT1, cT2);
```

---

```cpp
auto& tref = theMap.get_ref(k, lvalue);
```

```cpp
auto& tref = theMap.get(k).value_or(lvalue);
```

---

```cpp
auto uval = theMap.get_as<U>(k, cU1, cU2);
```

```cpp
auto uval =
    theMap.get(k).or_construct<U>(cU1, cU2);
```

---

```cpp
if (auto opt = theMap.get_as<std::optional<T&>>(k);
    opt) {
  auto& ref = *opt;
  // ...
}
```

```cpp
if (auto opt = theMap.get(k); opt) {
  auto& ref = *opt;
  // ...
}
```

:::


**Advantages of the R0 design over the Current design**

- R0 provides more concise and readable calls to `get` and `get_ref` in many
  cases.
- Desired "return value if present, else return alternative" functionality is
  all specified in one place in the R0 design, exactly where a beginner would
  look for it.
- R0 `map` and `unordered_map` specification changes would be independent of
  `optional`.

**Advantages of the Current design over the R0 design**

- The current `get` provides a direct indication, via a disengaged `optional`
  return value, that the key was not found.
- By returning `optional`, the current design can leverage all of the
  functionality of `optional`, including `value_or` and monadic operations. Any
  future improvements to `optional` could be accessed by users of `map::get`
  without modifying `map`.
- The current version has a single observer (`get`) compared to two observers
   for R0 (`get` and `get_ref`, assuming `get_as` is merged into `get`).  Since
   each observer requires four overloads (`const` and non-`const`, each having
   a `key_type` or templated `K` parameter), the interface simplification is
   noticeable.
- The current specification of `get` is simple to specify and implement, making
  it is easy to add to non-standard map-like containers and new standard
  containers such as `flat_map`.
- The current interface can be applied not only to associative map-like
  containers, but to any indexable container, including `vector` and `deque`,
  if we choose to do that.

During the
[2024-02-27 LEWGI (SG18) telcon](https://wiki.edg.com/bin/view/Wg21telecons2024/P3091#Library-Evolution-2024-02-27),
there was unanimous consent for `get` returning `optional<T&>` (known as the
Alternative Design in [@P3091R0]):

> POLL: The alternative design with a smaller container API with extensions to
> `std::optional` should be pursued.

+--+--+-+--+--+
|SF|WF|N|WA|SA|
+==+==+=+==+==+
| 6| 4|0| 0| 0|
+--+--+-+--+--+

Combine `optional<T>::value_or` and `optional<T>::or_construct`
---------------------------------------------------------------

It would be theoretically possible to add a variadic parameter list to
`value_or` so that more than one constructor argument could be passed at once,
obviating `or_construct` as a separate member.  However, when `T` is a
reference, [@P2988R3] says that the return value of `value_or` is also a
reference. Passing multiple constructor arguments to `value_or` requires
returning an rvalue. While it is theoretically possible to automatically
determine the value category (rvalue or lvalue) returned by `value_or`, such a
definition would be confusing, especially to a human reader, who must analyze
the code carefully to determine whether non-const operations on the returned
entity might inadvertently change a value in the original `optional`.

Lazy Evaluation of `or_construct` Argument
------------------------------------------

The map lookup functionality described in this paper was implemented as free
utility functions in [@Folly]. Specifically, the `folly::map_default(@_map_,
_key_, _dflt_@)` function behaves similar to the `@_map_@.get(@_key_, _dflt_@)`
function proposed in R0 of this paper. Folly goes one step further, however: if
_dflt_ is a functor taking no arguments and returns a value convertible to
`mapped_type`, then the functor is invoked if and only if the key is not found
in the map, i.e., the alternative value is computed *lazily* when needed.

If such lazy evaluation is desired within the framework of this proposal, the
functionality would be added to `optional<T>::or_construct`. Although not
directly related to map lookups, I would consider extending this proposal
accordingly.

Free functions instead of members
---------------------------------

It is possible to provide the functionality described in this paper using
namespace-scope functions, without modifying `std::map` and
`std::unordered_map`:

```cpp
template <class Map, class K, class... Args>
  typename optional<typename Map::mapped_type&> get(Map& m, const K& k);
template <class Map, class K, class... Args>
  typename optional<const typename Map::mapped_type&> get(const Map& m, const K& k);

auto x = get(m, k).value_or(v);
```

One benefit to this approach is that the namespace-scoped `get` template can
handle any *map-like* dictionary type (i.e., a type having a `mapped_type`, and
a `find` method that returns an `iterator` pointing to a key-value
`pair`). Such an approach has disadvantages, however:

 - It is less intuitive because it puts `get` outside of the map interface.
 - The short name can cause ADL issues.
 - The *map-like* concept is novel and not used elsewhere in the standard.  It
   is not clear that many classes model this concept and would therefore
   benefit from the generality.

Moving the `construct_or` functionality out of `optional` makes even less
sense, as there is only one `optional`, so there would be no benefit to making
any core observer into a free function.

Implementation Experience
=========================

An implementation, with tests and usage examples, can be found at
[https://github.com/phalpern/WG21-halpern/tree/main/P3091-map_lookup](https://github.com/phalpern/WG21-halpern/tree/main/P3091-map_lookup).

Some of the functionality can be found in Meta's [@Folly] library.

Wording
=======

Half of the changes below are relative to the 2023-12-18 working draft,
[@N4971]; the other half are relative to the paper proposing `optional<T&>`,
[@P2988R3].

Feature-test macros
-------------------

To the list in [version.syn]{.sref}, add:

> ::: add
> `#define __cpp_lib_map_get_optional yyyymmL // also in <map>, <multimap>`
> :::

and

> ::: add
> `#define __cpp_lib_optional_construct_or yyyymmL // also in <optional>`
> :::

Changes to `optional`
---------------------

Note that half of these changes are diffs against the Working Paper and the
other half are diffs against equivalent sections in [@P2988R3], which proposes
`optional<T&>`

In [optional.optional.general]{.sref} **in the WP**, insert the `or_construct`
observer after `value_or`:

>| `template<class U> constexpr T value_or(U&&) const &;`
>| `template<class U> constexpr T value_or(U&&) &&;`
::: add
>| `template <class U = remove_cvref_t<T>, class... Args>`
>|     `U constexpr or_construct(Args&&...);`
>| `template <class U = remove_cvref_t<T>, class... Args>`
>|     `U constexpr or_construct(Args&&...) const;`
>| `template <class U = remove_cvref_t<T>, class X, class... Args>`
>|     `U constexpr or_construct(initializer_list<X>, Args&&...);`
>| `template <class U = remove_cvref_t<T>, class X, class... Args>`
>|     `U constexpr or_construct(initializer_list<X>, Args&&...) const;`
:::

In the `optional<T&>` wording **from [@P2988R3], not the WP**, change
`value_or` and add `or_construct` to [optional.optional.general]:

>| `template<class U> constexpr` [`T&`]{.rm} [*see below*]{.add} `value_or(U&&) const;`
::: add
>| `template <class U = remove_cv_t<T>, class... Args>`
>|     `U or_construct(Args&&...) const;`
>| `template <class U = remove_cv_t<T>, class X, class... Args>`
>|     `U constexpr or_construct(initializer_list<X>, Args&&...) const;`
:::


At the end of [optional.observe]{.sref} **in the WP**, add the definition of
`or_construct`:

::: add
>| `template <class U = remove_cvref_t<T>, class... Args>`
>|     `U or_construct(Args&&... args);`
>| `template <class U = remove_cvref_t<T>, class... Args>`
>|     `U or_construct(Args&&... args) const;`

>> *Mandates*: `is_constructible_v<U, decltype(**this)> &&`
>> `is_constructible_v<U, Args...>` \
>> is `true`. If `U` is an lvalue reference type, then `sizeof...(Args)` is
>> `1` and, for `A0` being \
>> the single type in `Args`, `is_lvalue_reference_v<A0> &&` \
>> `is_convertible_v<add_pointer_t<A0>, add_pointer_t<U>> &&` \
>> `is_convertible_v<add_pointer_t<T>, add_pointer_t<U>>` is `true`.

>> *Effects*: Equivalent to:

>>> `return has_value() ? U(**this) : U(std::forward<Args>(args)...);`

>| `template <class U = remove_cvref_t<T>, class X, class... Args>`
>|     `U constexpr or_construct(initializer_list<X> il, Args&&...);`
>| `template <class U = remove_cvref_t<T>, class X, class... Args>`
>|     `U constexpr or_construct(initializer_list<X> il, Args&&...) const;`

>> *Mandates*: `! is_reference_v<U> &&`
>> `is_constructible_v<U, initializer_list<X>, Args...> &&` \
>> `is_constructible_v<U, decltype(**this)>` is `true`.

>> *Effects*: Equivalent to:

>>> `return has_value() ? U(**this) : U(il, std::forward<Args>(args)...);`

:::

In the `optional<T&>` wording **from [@P2988R3], not the WP**, change the
definition of `value_or` and add the definition of `or_construct` to
[optional.observe] :

>| `template<class U> constexpr` [`T&`]{.rm} [*see below*]{.add} `value_or(U&& v) const;`

>> [The return type is `common_reference_t<add_lvalue_reference_t<T>,
>> decltype(v)>`. Let *R* designate the return type.]{.add}

>> *Mandates*: [`is_constructible_v<add_lvalue_reference_t<T>, decltype(v)>` is
>> `true`]{.rm} \
>> [*R* is well formed and is an lvalue reference type.
>> `is_convertible_v<add_pointer_t<T>, add_pointer_t<@*R*@>> &&`
>> `is_convertible_v<add_pointer_t<U>, add_pointer_t<@*R*@>>` is `true`]{.add}.

>> *Effects*: Equivalent to:

>>> `return has_value() ?` [`static_cast<@*R*@>(`]{.add}`value()`[`)`]{.add} `:` [`static_cast<@*R*@>(`]{.add}`forward<U>(u)`[`)`]{.add}`;`

::: add
>> *Remark*: This function participates in overload resolution even when
>> the return type is ill-formed; if selected, the program is ill-formed.
:::

::: add
>| `template <class U = T, class... Args>`
>|     `U or_construct(Args&&...args) const;`

>> *Mandates*: `is_constructible_v<U, decltype(**this)> &&`
>> `is_constructible_v<U, Args...>` \
>> is `true`. If `U` is an lvalue reference type, then `sizeof...(Args)` is
>> `1` and, for `A0` being \
>> the single type in `Args`, `is_lvalue_reference_v<A0> &&` \
>> `is_convertible_v<add_pointer_t<A0>, add_pointer_t<U>> &&` \
>> `is_convertible_v<add_pointer_t<T>, add_pointer_t<U>>` is `true`.

>> *Effects*: Equivalent to:

>>> `return has_value() ? U(**this) : U(std::forward<Args>(args)...);`

>| `template <class U = remove_cv_t<T>, class X, class... Args>`
>|     `U constexpr or_construct(initializer_list<X> il, Args&&...) const;`

>> *Mandates*: `! is_reference_v<U> &&`
>> `is_constructible_v<U, initializer_list<X>, Args...> &&` \
>> `is_constructible_v<U, decltype(**this)>` is `true`.

>> *Effects*: Equivalent to:

>>> `return has_value() ? U(**this) : U(il, std::forward<Args>(args)...);`

:::

Changes to `map` and `unordered_map`
------------------------------------

In [map.overview]{.sref}/2, insert the `get` element-access members:

>| `//` _[map.access]{.sref}, element access_
>| `mapped_type& operator[](const key_type& x);`
>| `mapped_type& operator[](key_type&& x);`
>| `template<class K> mapped_type& operator[](K&& x);`
>| `mapped_type&       at(const key_type& x);`
>| `const mapped_type& at(const key_type& x) const;`
>| `template<class K> mapped_type&       at(const K& x);`
>| `template<class K> const mapped_type& at(const K& x) const;`
::: add
>| `optional<mapped_type&>       get(const key_type& x) noexcept;`
>| `optional<const mapped_type&> get(const key_type& x) const noexcept;`
>| `template<class K> optional<mapped_type&>       get(const K& x) noexcept;`
>| `template<class K> optional<const mapped_type&> get(const K& x) const noexcept;`
:::

At the end of [map.access]{.sref}, add these descriptions:

::: add
>| `optional<mapped_type&>       get(const key_type& x) noexcept;`
>| `optional<const mapped_type&> get(const key_type& x) const noexcept;`
>| `template<class K> optional<mapped_type&>       get(const K& x) noexcept;`
>| `template<class K> optional<const mapped_type&> get(const K& x) const noexcept;`

>> *Constraints*: For the third and fourth overloads, the *qualified-id*
>> `Compare::is_transparent` is valid and denotes a type.

>> *Preconditions*: The expression `find(x)` is well-formed and has
>> well-defined behavior.

>> *Returns*: `find(x)->second` if `find(x) == end()` is `false`, otherwise
>> `nullopt`.

>> *Complexity*: Logarithmic
:::

In [unord.map.overview]{.sref}/3, insert the `get`
element-access members:

>| `//` _[unord.map.elem]{.sref}, element access_
>| `mapped_type& operator[](const key_type& x);`
>| `mapped_type& operator[](key_type&& x);`
>| `template<class K> mapped_type& operator[](K&& x);`
>| `mapped_type&       at(const key_type& x);`
>| `const mapped_type& at(const key_type& x) const;`
>| `template<class K> mapped_type&       at(const K& x);`
>| `template<class K> const mapped_type& at(const K& x) const;`
::: add
>| `optional<mapped_type&>       get(const key_type& x) noexcept;`
>| `optional<const mapped_type&> get(const key_type& x) const noexcept;`
>| `template<class K> optional<mapped_type&>       get(const K& x) noexcept;`
>| `template<class K> optional<const mapped_type&> get(const K& x) const noexcept;`
:::

At the end of [unord.map.elem]{.sref}, add these descriptions:

::: add
>| `optional<mapped_type&>       get(const key_type& x) noexcept;`
>| `optional<const mapped_type&> get(const key_type& x) const noexcept;`
>| `template<class K> optional<mapped_type&>       get(const K& x) noexcept;`
>| `template<class K> optional<const mapped_type&> get(const K& x) const noexcept;`

>> *Constraints*: For the third and fourth overloads, the *qualified-id*s
>> `Hash::is_transparent` and `Pred::is_transparent` are valid and denote
>> types.

>> *Preconditions*: The expression `find(x)` is well-formed and has
>> well-defined behavior.

>> *Returns*: `find(x)->second` if `find(x) == end()` is `false`, otherwise
>> `nullopt`.
:::


Acknowledgments
===============

Thanks to Tomasz Kamiński for pushing me on the `optional<T&>` approach.

Thanks to Lori Hughes for copy editing support.

---
references:
  - id: Folly
    citation-label: Folly
    author: Meta
    title: "folly/folly/MapUtil.h"
    URL: https://github.com/facebook/folly/blob/323e467e2375e535e10bda62faf2569e8f5c9b19/folly/MapUtil.h#L35-L71
---
