---
title: "Policies for Using Allocators in Library Classes"
document: D3002R1
date: <!-- $TimeStamp$ -->2024-02-13 19:35 EST<!-- $ -->
audience: LEWG
author:
  - name: Pablo Halpern
    email: <phalpern@halpernwightsoftware.com>
working-draft: N4971
---

Abstract
========

To ensure consistency and cut down on excessive debate, LEWG is in the process
of creating a standing document, SD-9, of design policies to be followed by
default when proposing new facilities for the Standard Library; exceptions to
these policies would require a paper author to provide rationale for each
exception.  Because the Standard Library should give users control over the
source of memory used by Library objects, policies on when and how classes
should accept an allocator are badly needed so that allocator support does not
become an afterthought or a topic of endless debate.  This paper proposes
a set of such policies.

Change Log
==========

R1: Reorganized and added additional motivation and information required to
meet the policy-paper requirements specified in [@P2267R1].

R0: Initial version.

Motivation/Rationale
====================

Memory management is a major part of building software. Numerous facilities in
the C++ Standard library exist to give the programmer maximum control over how
their program uses memory:

* `std::unique_ptr` and `std::shared_ptr` are parameterized with *deleter*
  objects that control, among other things, how memory resources are reclaimed.

* `std::vector` is preferred over other containers in many cases because its
  use of contiguous memory provides optimal cache locality and minimizes
  allocate/deallocate operations. Indeed, the LEWG has spent a lot of time on
  `flat_set` ([@P1222R0]) and `flat_map` ([@P0429R3]), whose underlying
  structure defaults to `vector` for this reason.

* Operators `new` and `delete` are replaceable, giving programmers global
  control over how memory is allocated.

* The C++ object model makes a clear distinction between an object's memory
  footprint and it's lifetime.

* Language constructs such as `void*` and `reinterpet_cast` provide
  fine-grained access to objects' underlying memory.

* Standard containers and strings are parameterized with allocators, providing
  object-level control over memory allocation and element construction.

This fine-grained control over memory that C++ gives the programmer is a large
part of why C++ is applicable to so many domains --- from embedded systems with
limited memory budgets to games, high-frequency trading, and scientific
simulations that require cache locality, thread affinity, and other
memory-related performance optimizations.

An in-depth description of the value proposition for allocator-aware software
can be found in [@P2035R0].  Standard containers are the most ubiquitous
examples of *allocator-aware* types. Their `allocator_type` and `get_allocator`
members and allocator-parameterized constructors allow them to be used like
Lego® parts that can be combined and nested as necessary while retaining full
programmer control over how the whole assembly allocates memory. For scoped
allocators in particular (see [Prior Art](#Prior Art in the Standard), below),
having each element of a container support a predictable allocator-aware
interface is crucial to giving the programmer the ability to allocate all
memory from a single memory resource, such as an arena or pool. Note that the
allocator is a *configuration* parameter of an object and does not contribute
to its value.

In short, the principles underlying this policy proposal are:

1. **The Standard Library should be general and flexible**. To the extent
   possible, the user of a library class should have control over how memory is
   allocated.

2. **The Standard Library should be consistent**. The use of allocators should
   be consistent with the existing allocator-aware classes and class templates,
   especially those in the containers library.

3. **The parts of the Standard Library should work together**. If one part of
   the library gives the user control over memory allocation but another part
   does not, then the second part undermines the utility of the first.

4. **The Standard Library should encapsulate complexity**.  Fully general
   application of allocators is potentially complex and is best left to the
   experts implementing the Standard Library.  Users can choose their own
   subset of desirable allocator behavior only if the underlying Library
   classes allow them to choose their preferred approach, whether it be
   stateless allocators, statically typed allocators, polymorphic allocators,
   or no allocators.

5. **The Standard Library should try to provide simplifications of complex
   facilities**. The PMR part of the standard library provides a simplified
   allocator model for a common use case -- that of providing an allocator to a
   class object and its subparts without infecting the object's type.


Prior Art in the Standard
=========================

Allocator Types
---------------

An allocator type is a class template having member functions `allocate` and
`deallocate` and, optionally, `construct` and `destroy`. The requirements for
allocator types are described in [allocator.requirements]{.sref}.

Allocators can be divided into *stateless* and *stateful* categories, with
stateful allocators subdivided into *shallow* and *scoped* subcategories. A
shallow allocator controls affects only the top-level object to which it is
passed whereas a scoped allocator affects all of its allocator-aware
sub-objects as well. The Standard Library defines two allocators,
`std::allocator`, which is stateless, and `std::pmr::polymorphic_allocator`,
which is scoped. It also defines `std::scoped_allocator_adaptor`, which makes
shallow allocators into scoped allocators.

The `allocator_traits` class template provides a uniform interface for all
allocator types, providing default operations and types for optional interface
elements (see [allocator.traits]{.sref}).

Polymorphic Allocators
----------------------

Classic allocators are provided as template parameters, with behavior
determined at compile time. This model does not always scale, as clients of an
allocator-aware type also need to be templates to take advantage of the
flexibility afforded by the allocator facility.

The `std::pmr::polymorphic_allocator` class template is a scoped allocator that
acts as a bridge between the traditional statically selected allocator model
and a runtime-selected allocator model. The mechanism by which a
`polymorphic_allocator` manages memory is delegated to a *resource* object
whose type is derived from `std::pmr::memory_resource`. Two container objects
using `polymorphic_allocator` can have identical type yet allocate memory using
different mechanisms. Moreover, a user-defined type can use allocators in its
interface and implementation without being converted to a template, with all
the complexity and scaling issues that entails. At the cost of virtual function
dispatches for allocation and deallocation, polymorphic allocators provide a
simpler model for many uses.  See my CppCon 2017 talk, @Halpern2017, for more
information about polymorphic allocators and how they simplify allocator-aware
development.

Allocator-aware Containers
--------------------------

Except for `array`, each container in the Standard Library supports an
allocator template parameter and each of its constructors has a version that
allows an allocator to be passed in at initialization. An allocator-aware
container has an `allocator_type` member type and a `get_allocator` member
function that returns the allocator. The `Allocator` parameter for all
allocator-aware containers in the `std` namespace defaults to
`std::allocator`.

Allocator-aware containers are required, per [container.alloc.reqmts]{.sref},
to allocate memory and construct elements using the `allocate` and `construct`
members of `allocator_traits`. Whether a container's allocator is copied during
copy construction, copy assignment, move assignment, or swap is determined by
the allocator's *propagation traits*, which are also accessed via
`allocator_traits`.

Each allocator-aware container also has an alias in the `std::pmr` namespace
for which the `allocator_type` is `std::pmr::polymorphic_allocator`:

```cpp
namespace pmr {
  template <class T>
    class vector = std::vector<T, polymorphic_allocator<T>>;
}
```

The `pmr` alias makes the polymorphic allocators sub-model more accessible by
defining a set of containers having the same scoped allocator type that can be
nested arbitrarily, i.e,

```cpp
std::pmr::monotonic_buffer_resource buff_rsrc;

// The list and all strings within it will allocate memory from buff_rsrc.
std::pmr::list<std::pmr::string> my_list(&buff_rsrc);
```

Non-container Allocator Use
---------------------------

Allocators are used by `tuple`, `ranges::generator`, and `string_stream`,
`sync_stream`, regular expressions, and `promise`. `tuple` is an interesting
case because it does not allocate memory directly. Rather, `tuple`, might
contain elements that use allocators and has constructors that allow an
allocator to be forwarded to those elements. For example, `tuple<pmr::string,
int, double>` can be constructed with an allocator that is passed to the first
element. When an allocator is passed to a `tuple` constructor, each element is
constructed by *uses-allocator construction*
([allocator.uses.construction]{.sref}). Within the definition of
*uses-allocator construction*, there is a special case for `std::pair` that
allows an allocator to be passed to the pair's elements, even though `pair` is
not otherwise allocator-enabled.


Survey of Allocator Use in the Wider C++ Community
==================================================

C++ allocators are used for a variety of purposes in various
industries. Although statistics are hard to come by, below are some industry
anecdotes.

* **Bloomberg (financial services)**: Bloomberg is probably the biggest
  proponent of allocator use in the community.  Most of Bloomberg's C++ code
  base is allocator-enabled and allocators are used for a variety of purposes:
  cache locality, thread affinity, thread safety, shared memory, bug detection,
  and a type of garbage collection called *winking out*. Winking out is the act
  of abandoning an object without invoking its destructor and reclaiming all
  memory allocated by that object and its subobjects in a single
  operation. Though the informative paper @P2127R0[^2] was originally a
  tutorial for Bloomberg engineers, the general concepts in its first few
  sections of can be useful for WG21 members interested in how allocator-aware
  software is put together.

[^2]: Note that, due to some last-minute concerns, P2127 might not be published
in time for the pre-Tokyo mailing, but should be available shortly after the
mailing is sent out.

* **Intel (enabling software for Intel microchips)**: Intel uses allocators to
  provide thread safety and thread affinity, as well as to allocate specific
  data structures in special-purpose memory pools such as high-bandwidth
  memory and accelerator memory.

* **Cradle (music production software)**: Cradle used allocators to provide
  deterministic execution time for allocating from a fixed buffer. They use
  `pmr::polymorphic_allocator` with `pmr::monotonic_buffer_resource` and
  `std::pmr::unsynchronized_pool_resource` chained together to achieve
  determimism with ease of use.

* **Nvidia (GPUs)**: Nvidia uses allocators both for GPU memory and for local
  memory on CPUs.  They use a custom approach similar to `pmr` that lets
  allocation be asynchronous with respect to a stream ("stream-ordered"). Mark
  Hoemmen said "The best part of this model is that users can control
  allocation behavior, without needing to think too much about it."

* **NI (computerized lab instrumentation)**: NI used an allocator in their
  kernel-mode drivers to provide page-locked memory, and another allocator that
  provides pageable memory. Their use was not entirely standards conforming.

* **Multiple companies (Cyclic Graph)**: Graphs with cycles create notoriously
  difficult memory-management problems. Using `shared_ptr` alone creates cycles
  that never get deallocated whereas using `weak_ptr` requires a separate
  registry to refer to all nodes. The entire graph can be managed, however, by
  allocating all of the nodes from a common pool- or arena- allocator, which
  reclaims all used memory at once when the graph is no longer needed. Note
  that this approach assumes that no resources besides memory are held by the
  nodes (because node destructors are not called). This approach implements a
  modest part of the design described by Herb Sutter in his CppCon 2016
  keynote, @Sutter2016.


Summary of Proposed Policies
============================

The policies described in the [Proposed SD-9 Wording](#Proposed SD-9 Wording)
section, below, are intended to ensure that new classes that allocate memory,
directly or indirectly, are designed to enable the use of allocators to preform
that allocation. It would be ideal if some or all of the *allocator-aware
containers* requirements described in [container.alloc.reqmts]{.sref} were
hoisted to their own section of the standard, describing all allocator-aware
classes, not just containers. Such a change to the standard is outside the
scope of this policy proposal, but is worth considering for the future, as it
would make wording of these policies a bit simpler.

The most salient policy proposals are that:

* A class that might allocate per-object memory should be allocator aware.

* A class that contains members that might allocate per-object memory should
  accept an allocator on construction and forward it to those members'
  constructors.

An exception is made for situations where the overhead caused by an allocator
parameter would be too great. Specifically, if the compile-time or runtime
overhead of using `X<T, Alloc = std::allocator<>>` is excessive, then it might
make sense to define non-allocator-aware class `X<T>` and a separate
allocator-aware `basic_X<T, Alloc>` class. This approach is not encouraged,
however, as it can lead to interoperability problems and presents a confusing
choice to the programmer. Note that, as with all policy exceptions, it is
incumbent on the author of a library proposal to justify its application.


Why Adopting these Policies would Improve Coherence and Save Time
=================================================================

Advantages
----------

* **Consistency and iteroperability**: Having a consistent allocator-aware
  infrastructure allows the various types that allocate memory to work together
  as building blocks that give the programmer control over how memory is
  allocated and used.

* **Time savings**: The LEWG has spent many hours debating, in person and on
  the reflector, whether this class or that should take an allocator. These
  policies should short-circuit most of those debates.

* **Better-initial-quality proposals**: There have been many instances in my
  memory where a type was proposed without allocators and needed to be reworked
  to enable allocator use. Having these policies in the *checklist* of LEWG
  policies should enable paper authors to come to the committee with
  higher-quality and more complete proposals.

Disadvantages
-------------

* **Bigger interfaces**: Allocators make the class specification more complex.

* **More implementation complexity**: Allocators make implementation more
  difficult.

* **Longer compile times**: The flexibility afforded by the C++11 allocator
  model increases compile time by introducing metaprogramming based on
  `allocator_traits` and propagation traits.

In considering the first two disadvantages, bear in mind that our main task is
to make C++ as useful as possible for programmers, not to make our job easier
when writing interface specifications or implementing the Standard Library
itself. It has been shown repeatedly that beginners can ignore allocators as a
rule and tutorials for beginners can discuss allocators in more advanced
sections.

The third issue can be mitigated significantly by specializing a class template
specifically for `std::allocator`.  Such a specialization need not use
`allocator_traits` or consider propagation traits at all, and so should be
almost as fast to compile (and run) as a non-allocator-aware class, yet the
facility is still allocator-aware for users that want it.


Proposed SD-9 Wording
=====================

Append to "List of Standard Library Policies" section of SD-9, the following
policies. Note that the policy numbers are relative to the overall numbering of
policies in SD-9.

1. A class that allocates memory should be *allocator-aware*, and should
   conform to as many of the *allocator-aware container* requirements (section
   [container.alloc.reqmts]{.sref}) as apply, even for non-contaianers ---
   requirements on `T` are interpreted as requirements on any type potentially
   constructed within the allocated memory.

2. If it can be shown that applying the previous policy and making a class
   allocator-aware would incur excessive cost (in compile- and/or run-time),
   then the allocator-aware behavior can be separated out into a separate
   class, typically using the same name with the prefix, "`basic_`".

3. The allocator type for an allocator-aware class should be optional and
   default to a specialization of `std::allocator`.

4. For each allocator-aware class template, there should be an alias in the
   `std::pmr` namespace where the allocator type is specified as
   `std::pmr::polymorphic_allocator`. If the allocator-aware class name begins
   with the `basic_` prefix, the `std::pmr` alias name should typically *not*
   have the prefix.

5. A class that contains subobjects (base classes or members) that might use
   allocators should accept an allocator, `A`, at construction amd forward it
   to those subobjects via *uses-allocator construction* with allocator `A`
   ([allocator.uses.construction]{.sref}).  If such a class, `X`, does not
   define `allocator_type`, then `std::uses_allocator<X, Alloc>` should be
   specialized to derive from `true_type` for all acceptable allocator types,
   `Alloc` (see [allocator.uses.trait]{.sref}). Such a class is called
   *allocator-enabled*, but is not necessarily *allocator-aware*.

6. An object within allocator-provided memory should be constructed by invoking
   `allocator_traits<Alloc>::construct`. For the purpose at this policy, a
   *dynamically sized* buffer is treated as allocated memory, even if it
   happens to reside in the object's footprint when below a certain size (i.e.,
   the small-object optimization); otherwise it is treated as a member variable
   (see previous policy).

7. If a class is allocator-aware or allocator-enabled, then every constructor
   should have a variant (via overloading or default arguments) that takes an
   allocator parameter. This quality enables *uses-allocator construction* in
   generic contexts (see [allocator.uses.construction]{.sref}).

---
references:
  - id: P2127R0
    citation-label: P2127R0
    author:
      - family: Halpern
        given: Pablo
    title: "Making C++ Software Allocator Aware"
    URL: http://wg21.link/P2127R0
  - id: Halpern2017
    citation-label: Halpern2017
    author:
      - family: Halpern
        given: Pablo
    title: "Allocators, The Good Parts"
    URL: https://youtu.be/v3dz-AKOVL8?si=mi5JOJMaqD6lvRqv
  - id: Sutter2016
    citation-label: Sutter2016
    author:
      - family: Sutter
        given: Herb
    title: "Leak-Freedom in C++... By Default"
    URL: https://youtu.be/JfmTagWcqoE?si=OZ7EeziRKPaDnHSx
---
